### Another year

Here are some major changes over the last year, in roughly chronological order:

#### macros

These are basically like function calls, and I actually wound up with two
kinds.  Maybe overkill?

Now that I have `ky` files, I started to want to be able to define new calls
out of compositions of other ones.  These macros are defined textually in the
`ky` language, and are basically just replaced with their values.  The
replacement is post-parsing, but call names are still looked up dynamically,
which is important because it means, for instance, a call to `m` will look up
the instrument specific mute technique.  This is kind of like late binding, so
these are called dynamic macros.

Then, calls started to require "realize" postproc calls, and require them in a
specific order, e.g. cancel notes, then infer pitches, then randomize starts.
That made me want to define a call as a composition of other calls, in Haskell.
The other calls might be in a different module, and I didn't want to rely
on what happens to be in scope, and in contrast to dynamic macros, don't want
to be vulnerable to rebinding.  This is like static binding, so these are
static macros.

#### gamakam4

Every once in a while I would write a library for gamakam, and then decide it
was too clumsy.  The 4th incarnation seems to more or less work, though it's
still missing a lot.  It's actually just a simplification of gamakam3, from
last year.

#### negative duration

I once again reworked how negative durations worked.  I figured out that even
Balinese notation seems to work better if only certain calls use negative
duration.  For instance, norot has a bit of preparation, but is mostly
sustaining a pitch in the usual positive manner.

But then it's quite common to have a negative duration event aligning with a
positive one, and since I represented negative durations as exactly that, I'd
wind up with two notes with the same start, which violates the track invariant
about no overlapping notes... not to mention it would be a tricky UI question
of which one you wanted to edit.

So I decided to change the representation to actually all be positive
durations, but negative oriented notes would have a flag, and the UI would
interpret that flag as drawing text at the bottom.  For some reason I was
also under the impression that this would get rid of all of the complicated
special casing to support negative durations, since there wouldn't actually
be negative durations anymore.

It turned out I was totally wrong about that last part, because while I could
indeed do that, it turns out that for the purposes of editing I want to treat
negative duration notes in the complementary way (e.g. set duration moves the
start, or selections include the end but not the start), so I not only had to
keep all the complicated stuff, but I had to reimplement it for the new
implementation, and it kind of got even more complicated because now it sort
of acts like the note is at the end of the duration, but it's actually just
a normal note with a flag.  Also it's still not worked out, because it's quite
confusing to edit them, since you edit at the top but the text appears at the
bottom.

So I don't know.  Maybe I just need to polish the rough edges, and then get
used to the quirks.  Or maybe go back to real negative durations, but come up
with some other way to have two events that "start" at the same time.

The bright part is that between this and note cancellation I seem to finally
have a more or less usable way to express typical moving kotekan patterns, even
if the entry and editing is rough.  It just seems way more involved than it
should be.

#### text display refactor

Since the above negative duration stuff meant I started actually writing scores
that used negative duration, it annoyed me that text wrapping didn't work for
them.  Also, I thought it would be worth putting some time into fancy text
layout so I could squeeze in the right-aligned merged track text wherever there
was room, so I rewrote the text wrapping algorithm.  It got really annoyingly
complicated, especially with positive and negative events, and it still has
some minor bugs I haven't bothered to go figure out yet, but at least negative
events wrap upwards now.

It turns out squeezing the right-aligned text into gaps caused by wrapped left
aligned text just doesn't happen that often, though.

#### im, 音

I sampled my reyong, and the simple job of supporting multiple articulations
(open, damped, cek, etc.) per pitch turned out to be ridiculously complicated.
This is due to terrible MIDI, terrible buggy Kontakt, and its terrible excuse
for a scripting language, KSP.

I always intended to add a non-realtime non-MIDI synthesizer, and since surely
a sampler is the easiest to implement, I started on an implementation.  I got
as far as a basic proof of concept, namely a note protocol, an offline
renderer, and a simple sample playback VST to handle the synchronization.
It's crazy how much simpler things become when I don't have to deal with MIDI.

However, losing realtime response is likely to be quite annoying, though I have
a plan for how to get it back in a limited way.  And since I already did all
the work to get the reyong samples working in Kontakt, I don't have a lot of
motivation yet to finish my own implementation.  It will likely have to wait
until I either have another annoying sampling job, or more likely, finally get
around to writing a physical modelling synthesizer.

#### instrument generalization

Now that I technically have a non-MIDI non-lilypond backend, I needed to
generalize instruments into common and backend-specific parts.

Also there was a lengthy and messy transition from the old way where you'd
directly name an instrument's full name in the score, to having short aliases
to the full instrument name, to aliases becoming separate allocations for the
instrument (so you could use the same instrument twice), to aliases becoming
the only way to refer to an instrument and renaming them to "allocations."

In retrospect, I should have done it that way from the beginning.

#### retuning

Of course I already have arbitrary tuning via pitch bend, but it's a hassle to
add a bunch of VSTs, so I added support for retuning via the MIDI realtime
tuning "standard" (supported only by pianoteq), and retuning via KSP (naturally
supported only by Kontakt).

#### hspp

GHC 7.10 finally has call stacks, which let me get rid of the hacky
preprocessor.  It served its purpose, but it's much nicer to not need it.
I lost calling function names because the 7.10 support for that is kind of
broken, but I think it may be fixed in GHC 8.

#### solkattu

The track format isn't great for expressing rhythms, since the rhythm is
implicit in the physical location of the note.  Also, except for integration,
which is complicated, it's basically "first order" in that it doesn't easily
support a score that yields a score.  For instance, the mapping between
solkattu and mridangam strokes is abstract and dependent on the korvai, and
of course could map to any number of instruments.

So I came up with a haskell-embedded DSL which is purely textual and thus
can express rhythmic abstraction.  It's mostly useful for writing down lessons,
but it can be easily reduced to track notation, so in theory I could write
solkattu and integrate that to a mridangam track.  I also have some
experimental alternate realizations to Balinese kendang and ideas for a reyong
"backend".  That way I could write in solkattu, and then have it directly
realized to any number of instruments, either to play simultaneously or
exchange material.

It looks like this:

```
t4s :: [Korvai]
t4s = korvais (adi 6) mridangam $ map (purvangam.)
    [ spread 3 tdgnt . spread 2 tdgnt . tri_ __ tdgnt
    , spread 3 tdgnt . tri (ta.__.din.__.gin.__.na.__.thom)
    , tri_ (dheem.__3) (ta.din.__.ta.__.din.__.p5)
    , tri_ (dheem.__3) (p5.ta.__.din.__.ta.din.__)
    , p123 p6 (dheem.__3)

    , p123 p5 (tat.__3.din.__3)
    , let dinga s = din!s . __ . ga
        in p5.dinga u . ta.ka . p5.p5. dinga i . ta.ka.ti.ku . p5.p5.p5
    , tri (tat.dinga . tat.__.dinga.p5)
    ]
    where
    tdgnt = ta.din.gin.na.thom
    p123 p sep = trin sep p (p.p) (p.p.p)
    purvangam = tri (ta_katakita . din.__6)
    mridangam = make_mridangam $
        [ (ta.din.gin.na.thom, [k, t, k, n, o])
        , (ta.din, [k, od])
        , (dheem, [u])
        , (din, [od])
        , (tat, [k])
        , (ta.ka.ti.ku, [k, p, n, p])
        , (ta.ka, [k, p])
        , (dinga, [od, p])
        ] ++ m_ta_katakita
```

And reduces to a mridangam realization like this:

```
k _ p k t k t k k o o k D _ _ _ _ _ k _ p k t k
t k k o o k D _ _ _ _ _ k _ p k t k t k k o o k

D _ _ _ _ _ k _ _ t _ _ k _ _ n _ _ o _ _ k _ t
_ k _ n _ o _ k t k n o _ k t k n o _ k t k n o
```
